---
date: 2024-10-11
headline: Weeknotes #41
projects: dangerzone
status: draft
---

# Weeknotes #41

I stayed a bit with the family in Paris before coming back to Rennes.

## What happened

Dangerzone:

- We found with the bug that lead to 0.7.1 that we asked the same questions, so we changed the way users report issues on Github, making it easier for us to get the needed information ;
- On the same spirit, I made some changes to `dangerzone-cli`, proposing to add a `--debug` flag to gather some more debug information without having the users enter weird commands ;
- We [debugged why](https://github.com/freedomofpress/dangerzone/issues/865#issuecomment-2405159826) dangerzone is not working with colima (an open-source replacement for docker, on Mac).
- I've started doing some research on having independent container updates, which would let us update containers without having to issue new releases.
- Alex has almost finished some work which removes one container, doing the pixels to PDF conversion phase on the host rather than on a "compatibility layer". 

uMap:

- We had a meeting on how to

## Takeaways

- Travelling and seeing the family gave me a lot of energy
- I really liked the sharing sessions that happen at FPF. The last one being about TUF and Signstore.
- I spent too much time on some implementation details, discussing with Alex. I believe one of the reasons I'm doing this is to have some python technical discussions.

## Sharing

- « Être juif en France après le 7 octobre », a series of episodes on how to be jude in France after October the 7th: https://www.binge.audio/podcast/programme-b/etre-juif-en-france-apres-le-7-octobre
- I started playing to Dawnmaker, done by Arpentor Studio, a videogame studio started by an ex-mozillian. A turn-by-turn deck building game. I really enjoyed it!
